docs: add host attachment modes (#118)
githedgehog/docs: docs/user-guide/host-settings.md

# Host Settings
This page contains settings for Linux servers, it agnostic of the Linux
distribution. The commands use the `ip` utility from the `iproute2` package.
These settings do not persist across reboots. Consult the documentation from
the Linux distribution for guides on how to persist the settings in for example
[Netplan](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/server/explanation/networking/configuring-networks/index.html) or 
[Network Manager](https://networkmanager.dev/docs/admins/). For additional
details consult the [kernel bonding
driver](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/networking/bonding.html)
documentation.

## MCLAG / ESLAG

> TODO - does this active/active?

Reviewer: Let's cleanup from TODOs before merging please (or mark as draft if it's not ready to be merged yet)

The multi-chassis LAG architecture is a way to reduce the number of failure points
in a network architecture. At the physical layer an MCLAG topology is a single
server connected to two different switches and those switches are connected.

> For a total of 3 physical connections.

Reviewer: I think mentioning physical conns that includes conn between switches is very misleading.

Author: TODO: remove the summation

ESLAG is a similar topology as MCLAG with the beneficial difference that the
switches do not need a to be connected to each other. For a total of 2 physical

> connections

Reviewer: We technically allow up to connect up to 4 switches with ESLAG

`layer2` or `layer2+3`. To configure this in linux:
``` bash
sudo ip link add $bond_name type bond miimon 100 mode 802.3ad layer2
sudo ip link set $slave1_name master $bond_name
sudo ip link set $slave2_name master $bond_name
```

The `miimon 100` indicates that the  bonding driver will use miimon to
determine if the link is `up` and it will poll every 100 milliseconds.

`layer2` or `layer2+3` is the hashing mode, which controls the input into the
hash function. See the [kernel bonding
driver](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/networking/bonding.html)
documentation for additional details.

After the bond has been created, it can receive a dhcp address, or be
statically assigned:

`sudo ip addr add 10.10.10.3/24 dev bond0`

To check the status of this bond:

`cat /proc/net/bonding/bond0`

## LAG, Bonding, Teaming, Bundling

A LAG configuration can be used to increase the bandwidth to and from an end
host. For example, if a server has 2 25 Gbps ports, the ports can be bonded so
they will have an aggregate 50 Gbps of available bandwidth. At the physical
layer there are two cables going from the server to a single switch.

> To enable fast detection of faults, `802.3ad` is the recommended mode for bonds

Reviewer: Isn't it the only one supported, not just recommended?

Author: TODO: recommended -> supported. We are trying to close off potential error paths.

attaching to the Open Network Fabric. The steps to configure the bond are the
same as the [above server settings](#server-settigns)

The kernel bonding driver discusses other modes for bonding, several of those modes don't require cooperation on the
switch side, so there is no fabric configuration needed. The primary concern
for using these modes is out of order TCP delivery and fault detection and
correction time.

## Active / Passive Fault Tolerance

Some networking equipment doesn't support MCLAG or ESLAG. If a user would like

> the host to have a fault tolerant availability the Linux server bond can be

Reviewer: I think it's good to explicitly mention that a pair of Unbundled connections to be used for it

Author: Agreed.

# Host Settings
This page contains settings for Linux servers, it agnostic of the Linux
distribution. The commands use the `ip` utility from the `iproute2` package.
These settings do not persist across reboots. Consult the documentation from
the Linux distribution for guides on how to persist the settings in for example
[Netplan](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/server/explanation/networking/configuring-networks/index.html) or 
[Network Manager](https://networkmanager.dev/docs/admins/). For additional
details consult the [kernel bonding
driver](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/networking/bonding.html)
documentation.

## MCLAG / ESLAG

The multi-chassis LAG architecture is a way to provide device redundancy
in a network architecture. At the physical layer an MCLAG topology is a single
server connected to two different switches and those switches are directly connected
to each other in addition to being connected to the rest of the fabric.

ESLAG is a similar topology as MCLAG with the beneficial difference that the

> switches do not need a to be connected to each other. There can be up to 4

Reviewer 2: The switches do have to be connected to each other, but it can be through the spines, not a direct connection between the switches, we should clarify.  Perhaps a note that we implement the MCLAG of the underlying switch platform and provide a link to MCLAG generally?

Reviewer 2: For ESLAG, we should have a link explaining how ESI Multihomeing works, but just a reference that ESLAG will use ESI MH for configuration and have a link.

Author: @Frostman can correct me if I am wrong, but I don't believe we support having an MCLAG communicate through the fabric. 

As far as links on MCLAG / ESLAG, outside of wikipedia, there isn't a lot of what I think are high quality links. Most of them are to vendor specific documentation, or a bloggers page. I can link to the sonic page, but that might create confusion.

switches in an ESLAG group, whereas MCLAG is always 2 switches.

> The standard that governs this technology is commonly referred to as 802.3ad.

Reviewer 2: 802.3ad is the standard that controls the host side of the protocol.  Perhaps the write way to phrase this is something like:

```
Regardless of whether MCLAG or ESLAG is configured for the fabric, the host must be configured to bond its 2 (or more) host ports using LACP (802.3ad)
```

Or something like that.

### Server Settings

The supported server side setting for bonding is `802.3ad`, with hashing policy

> `layer2` or `layer2+3`. To configure this in Linux:

Reviewer 2: Do we want to recommend layer2?  Performance will suck for any routed TCP and similar traffic.  If we insist on mentioning it, we should say, something along the lines of `unless you have a specific reason, you should choose layer 2+3`.

``` bash

> sudo ip link add $bond_name type bond miimon 100 mode 802.3ad layer2

Reviewer 2: and our examples should definitely be `layer2+3`

sudo ip link set $slave1_name master $bond_name
sudo ip link set $slave2_name master $bond_name
```

The `miimon 100` indicates that the  bonding driver will use miimon to
determine if the link is `up` and it will poll every 100 milliseconds.

`layer2` or `layer2+3` is the hashing mode, which controls the input into the
hash function. See the [kernel bonding
driver](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/networking/bonding.html)
documentation for additional details.

After the bond has been created, it can receive a dhcp address, or be
statically assigned:

> `sudo ip addr add 10.10.10.3/24 dev bond0`

Reviewer 2: Again, how did you pick these IPs, can we somehow make more clear that they are example IPs?

> `sudo ip addr add 10.10.10.3/24 dev bond0`

Author: Without the prompt the copy/ paste will be more user friendly. Are you okay with simply `console`?

> `sudo ip addr add 10.10.10.3/24 dev bond0`

Reviewer 3: No, `console` without the prompt is broken. If you really think copy/paste is an issue, let's keep `bash` instead of `console`.

In Cilium docs I added a button to copy the commands without the output lines and without the prompt symbol when the block is `console`. Not sure if it would be doable to add something similar here :thinking: (but clearly not in this PR).

To check the status of this bond:

`cat /proc/net/bonding/bond0`

## LAG, Bonding, Teaming, Bundling

A LAG configuration can be used to increase the bandwidth to and from an end
host. For example, if a server has 2 25 Gbps ports, the ports can be bonded so
they will have an aggregate 50 Gbps of available bandwidth. At the physical
layer there are two cables going from the server to a single switch.

To enable fast detection of faults, `802.3ad` is the supported mode for bonds
attaching to the Open Network Fabric. The steps to configure the bond are the
same as the [above server settings](#server-settigns)

The kernel bonding driver discusses other modes for bonding, several of those modes don't require cooperation on the
switch side, so there is no fabric configuration needed. The primary concern

> for using these modes is out of order TCP delivery and fault detection and

Reviewer 2: So we should recommend layer2+3 on the host here, and I think the switch *should* do the right thing, though I'm not sure if it will or not.

correction time.

## Active / Passive Fault Tolerance

> Some networking equipment doesn't support MCLAG or ESLAG. If a user would like

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some networking equipment doesn't support MCLAG or ESLAG. If you want
```

> the host to have a fault tolerant availability the Linux server bond can be
> configured for active / standby. In this topology, a link is connected from

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the host to have a fault tolerant availability, you can configure the Linux server
bond for active / standby. In this topology, a link is connected from
```

> server-1 to switch 1 and another link is connected from server-1 to switch 2.

Reviewer 3: Consistency on dashes between `server-1` and `switch n`?

> There is no [MCLAG connection](connections.md#mclag) nor [switch

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is neither [MCLAG connection](connections.md#mclag) nor [switch
```

(Not a native speaker, but I think?)

group](devices.md#redundancy-groups) configuration applied to the
switches. When adding these links to the fabric via the `kubectl` command or
the wiring diagram, use the [unbundled](connections.md#unbundled) connection
kind.

### Active / Passive Bond Settings

On the host:

1. create a bond: 
``` bash
sudo ip link add bond0 type bond mode active-backup miimon 50 num_grat_arp 5 primary enp2s1
```

> 2. add the slaves to the bond:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. add member interfaces to the bond:
```

``` bash
  sudo ip link set link enp2s1 master bond0
  sudo ip link set link enp2s2 master bond0
```
3. Add an address to the bond:
``` bash
  sudo ip addr add 10.30.10.10/24 dev bond0`
```
4. Make the bond  the default route:
```bash

>   sudo ip route add default via 10.30.10.1

Reviewer 2: Why 10.30.10.1?  Do we have a running example that uses this?

1: lo: <LOOPBACK,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 65536 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
    link/loopback 00:00:00:00:00:00 brd 00:00:00:00:00:00
2: enp2s1: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,SLAVE,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc mq master bond0 state UP mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
    link/ether a6:eb:64:de:95:92 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff permaddr a0:36:9f:3f:1a:e8
3: enp2s2: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,SLAVE,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc mq master bond0 state UP mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
    link/ether a6:eb:64:de:95:92 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff permaddr 14:02:ec:7f:3a:3c
4: enp2s0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc pfifo_fast state UP mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 0c:20:12:fe:01:00 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
10: bond0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,MASTER,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
    link/ether a6:eb:64:de:95:92 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
13: bond0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
    link/ether a6:eb:64:de:95:92 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
```

Confirm that the bonding driver is reporting the selected primary interface:
```console

> cat /proc/net/bonding/bond0

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
core@server-1 ~ $ cat /proc/net/bonding/bond0
```

With `console`, you need a prompt so the highlighter can make the distinction between commands and output.

Ethernet Channel Bonding Driver: v6.6.74-flatcar

Bonding Mode: fault-tolerance (active-backup)
Primary Slave: enp2s1 (primary_reselect always)
Currently Active Slave: enp2s1
MII Status: up
MII Polling Interval (ms): 50
Up Delay (ms): 0
Down Delay (ms): 0
Peer Notification Delay (ms): 0

Slave Interface: enp2s1
MII Status: up
Speed: 10000 Mbps
Duplex: full
Link Failure Count: 0
Permanent HW addr: a0:36:9f:3f:1a:e8
Slave queue ID: 0

Slave Interface: enp2s2
MII Status: up
Speed: 10000 Mbps
Duplex: full
Link Failure Count: 0
Permanent HW addr: 14:02:ec:7f:3a:3c
Slave queue ID: 0
```

### Failure Scenarios
When `miimon` detects that the primary slave is no longer `up`, the bonding
driver will send 5 gratitious arps via the secondary slave to notify the switch
that the IP address is now on a new switch. The fabric will start routing
traffic to this location and the host will start receiving traffic.

> If the `miimon` polling determines that the primary slave link is `up` the
> bonding driver will switch back to the primary slave. This behavior is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the `miimon` polling determines that the primary bonded interface link is `up` the
bonding driver will switch back to this primary bonded interface. This behavior is
```

Let's try to avoid the “master” and “slave” terminology if we can, please?

configurable, see the [kernel bonding
driver](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/networking/bonding.html)
documentation for additional details.

The change over process will result in dropped packets, but should not result
in TCP timeouts. 

> ## VLANS

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## VLANs
```

Reviewer 3: VLANS -> VLANs still applies

> A Linux host is capable of receiving tagged and untagged traffic. Saying the

Reviewer 2: Do you briefly want to explain tagged traffic?

```
A Linux host is capable of receiving tagged and untagged traffic.  
Tagged traffic has the VLAN (802.1q) header intact, untagged traffic has the VLAN header stripped before it reaches the host.
```

> same thing, another way, a Linux host can be attached to a trunk or access port

Reviewer 2: I would drop the trunk/access language here.

> A Linux host is capable of receiving tagged and untagged traffic. Saying the
> same thing, another way, a Linux host can be attached to a trunk or access port
> on a switch.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Linux host is capable of receiving tagged and untagged traffic. In other words,
a Linux host can be attached to a trunk or access port on a switch.
```

But I agree with Manish, I'd probably keep just one of the two versions.

The Open Network Fabric is capable of emitting tagged and untagged traffic. The

> setting to change if traffic is tagged or untagged is on the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
setting to change whether traffic is tagged or untagged is on the
```

[VPCAttahcment](vpcs.md#vpcattachment), specifically the `nativeVLAN` field.
The default value of this field is `false`, meaning the fabric will emit tagged

> traffic. This means that the Linux host must handle the tag, this is

Reviewer 2: Here you can add (i.e., the switch port is configured as a trunk port)

accomplished by creating a link layer interface on the host for the tag:
```bash
sudo ip link add link enp2s1 name enp2s1.1001 type vlan id 1001
```

> The name `enp2s1.1001` is by convention, it can be customized. The `vlan` in
> this example is `1001` that is created when the subnet is created inside the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The name `enp2s1.1001` is by convention, it can be customized. The `vlan id` in
this example is `1001` and was created when the subnet was created inside the
```

> [VPC](vpcs.md#vpc). 

Reviewer 2: You should have a short paragraph here explaining untagged traffic with the other `nativeVLAN` setting.

> ### Multiple VLANS on a port

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Multiple VLANs on a port
```

> To configure multiple vlans exiting a single port, attach the VPCs that hold
> the vlan to the port:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To configure multiple VLANs exiting a single port, attach the VPCs that hold
the VLAN to the port:
```

I find this sentence is not super clear, can you please rephrase?

```bash
kubectl fabric vpc attach --vpc-subnet vpc-1/default --connection server-1--leaf-1

> kubectl fabric vpc attach --vpc-subnet vpc-2/default --connection server-1--leaf-1

Reviewer 2: Could you pop this document into Claude or ChatGPT and ask for critique on organization of the content and other suggestions and see if there is anything worthwhile here.  I think the organization could be better and I'll bet the AI makes good suggestions.

Author: Claude wants a phone number, which I dont give out. ChatGPT didn't have any significant changes. I will try grammarly later.

server. For example, [Netplan][netplan] or [Network Manager][nmanager]. For
additional details on options and behavior, consult the [kernel bonding driver][bonding] documentation.

[nmanager]: https://networkmanager.dev/docs/admins/
[netplan]: https://documentation.ubuntu.com/server/explanation/networking/configuring-networks/index.html

## MCLAG / ESLAG

The multi-chassis LAG architecture is a way to provide device redundancy
in a network architecture. At the physical layer, an MCLAG topology is a single
server connected to two different switches and, those switches are directly connected
to each other in addition to being connected to the rest of the fabric.

ESLAG is a similar technology to MCLAG, with the beneficial difference that the
switches do not need to be directly connected to each other. There can be up to 4
switches in an ESLAG group, whereas MCLAG is always two switches.

Regardless of whether MCLAG or ESLAG is chosen, the host must configure its two
(or more) ports using LACP (IEEE 802.3ad).

### Server Settings

The supported server-side setting for bonding is `802.3ad`, with hashing policy
`layer2` or `layer2+3`. `layer2+3` transmit hashing is the recommended

> setting for the overwhelming majority of scenarios. 
> To configure this in Linux:
> ``` bash

Reviewer 3: Nit: More line breaks?

````suggestion
setting for the overwhelming majority of scenarios. 

To configure this in Linux:

``` bash
````

Generally I'd always skip a line between a paragraph and a code block (here, and elsewhere in the doc).

# Host Settings

> This page contains settings for Linux servers, it agnostic of the Linux

Reviewer 2: Please have a meaningful commit description for this commit.  Maybe something like "minor edits, better formatting for console code sections"

> switches in an ESLAG group, whereas MCLAG is always two switches.

Reviewer 2: More menaingful commit message please for changes integrated.
